.TH Qucs "1" "September 2004" "Debian/GNU Linux" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
Qucs \- An integrated electronic circuit simulator.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qucs
[\fIOPTION\fR] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBQucs\fR is an integrated circuit simulator which means you are able
to setup a circuit with a graphical user interface (GUI) and simulate
the large-signal, small-signal and noise behaviour of the circuit.
After that simulation has finished you can view the simulation results
on a presentation page or window.

The software aims to support all kinds of circuit simulation types,
e.g. DC, AC, S-parameter, harmonic balance analysis, noise analysis,
etc.

\fBQucsator\fR, the simulation backend, is a command line circuit
simulator.  It takes a network list in a certain format as input and
outputs a Qucs dataset.  It has been programmed for usage in the Qucs
project but may also be used by other applications.

.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of Qucs can always be obtained from
\fBwww.sourceforge.net\fR or \fBwww.freshmeat.net\fR
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Known bugs are documented within the BUGS file.  Report bugs to
<qucs-bugs@lists.sourceforge.net>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2003, 2004, 2005 Michael Margraf <michael.margraf@alumni.tu-berlin.de>
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Michael Margraf <michael.margraf@alumni.tu-berlin.de> and
Stefan Jahn <stefan@lkcc.org>.