.TH Qucsator "1" "September 2004" "Debian/GNU Linux" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
Qucsator \- An integrated electronic circuit simulator.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qucsator
[\fIOPTION\fR] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBQucs\fR is an integrated circuit simulator which means you are able
to setup a circuit with a graphical user interface (GUI) and simulate
the large-signal, small-signal and noise behaviour of the circuit.
After that simulation has finished you can view the simulation results
on a presentation page or window.

The software aims to support all kinds of circuit simulation types,
e.g. DC, AC, S-parameter, harmonic balance analysis, noise analysis,
etc.

\fBQucsator\fR, the simulation backend, is a command line circuit
simulator.  It takes a network list in a certain format as input and
outputs a Qucs dataset.  It has been programmed for usage in the Qucs
project but may also be used by other applications.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
display this help and exit
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
display version information and exit
.TP
\fB\-i\fR FILENAME
use file as input netlist (default stdin)
.TP
\fB\-o\fR FILENAME
use file as output dataset (default stdout)
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-bar\fR
enable textual progress bar
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-gui\fR
special progress bar used by gui
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-check\fR
check the input netlist and exit
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of Qucs can always be obtained from
\fBwww.sourceforge.net\fR or \fBwww.freshmeat.net\fR
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Known bugs are documented within the BUGS file.  Report bugs to
<qucs-bugs@lists.sourceforge.net>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 Stefan Jahn <stefan@lkcc.org>
.br
Copyright \(co 2006 Helene Parruitte <parruit@enseirb.fr>
.br
Copyright \(co 2006 Bastien Roucaries <roucaries.bastien@gmail.com>
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The technical documentation for
.B Qucsator
is maintained as a LaTeX manual.  The precompiled postscript (or pdf)
file comes with every new release of the application.  This
documentation is also online available (as HTML) at
<http://qucs.sourceforge.net/>.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Michael Margraf <michael.margraf@alumni.tu-berlin.de>,
Vincent Habchi, F5RCS <10.50@free.fr>, Helene Parruitte
<parruit@enseirb.fr>, Bastien Roucaries <roucaries.bastien@gmail.com>
and Stefan Jahn <stefan@lkcc.org>.
