.TH QucsDigiLib "1" "October 2009" "Debian/GNU Linux" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
QucsDigiLib \- A wrapper script for digital modules and libraries.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qucsdigilib
[\fIOPTION\fR] \fIinfile\fR \fIdir\fR \fIentity\fR \fIlibrary\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBQucs\fR is an integrated circuit simulator which means you are able
to setup a circuit with a graphical user interface (GUI) and simulate
the large-signal, small-signal and noise behaviour of the circuit.
After that simulation has finished you can view the simulation results
on a presentation page or window.

The software aims to support all kinds of circuit simulation types,
e.g. DC, AC, S-parameter, harmonic balance analysis, noise analysis,
etc.

\fBQucsDigiLib\fR is a wrapper script for digital modules and
libraries created by Qucs.  The program utilizes the \fBFreeHDL\fR
compiler in order to convert the VHDL output of Qucs into a C++ file.
Thereafter this C++ source is compiled to a binary.  The binary is
then copied into the VHDL directory.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fR INFILE
the filename of the VHDL file to be simulated located in the
directory specified in \fIDIR\fR
.TP
\fR DIR
the name of the directory where the compilation is going to be performed
.TP
\fR ENTITY
the entity name implemented in the VHDL file
.TP
\fR LIBRARY
library name into which the module will reside
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of Qucs can always be obtained from
\fBwww.sourceforge.net\fR or \fBwww.freshmeat.net\fR
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Known bugs are documented within the BUGS file.  Report bugs to
<qucs-bugs@lists.sourceforge.net>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2005 Michael Margraf <michael.margraf@alumni.tu-berlin.de>
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Michael Margraf <michael.margraf@alumni.tu-berlin.de> and
Stefan Jahn <stefan@lkcc.org>.
